docs/development/virtual_environments.rst, before:

Virtual Environments: Servers
=============================

SecureDrop is a multi-server system, and  you may need the full server
stack available in order to develop and test some features. To make this easier, 
the project includes a Vagrantfile that can be used to create two predefined 
virtual environments:

* :ref:`Staging <staging_vms>`
* :ref:`Production <production_vms>`

This document explains the purpose of, and how to get started working with, each
one.

.. note:: If you plan to alter the configuration of any of these machines, make sure to
          review the :ref:`config_tests` documentation.

.. note:: If you see test failures due to ``Too many levels of symbolic links``
          and you are using VirtualBox, try restarting VirtualBox.

.. _staging_vms:

Staging
-------

A compromise between the development and production environments. This
configuration can be thought of as identical to the production environment, with
a few exceptions:

* The Debian packages are built from your local copy of the code, instead of
  installing the current stable release packages from https://apt.freedom.press.
* The staging environment is configured for direct SSH access so it's
  more ergonomic for developers to interact with the system during debugging.
* The Postfix service is disabled, so OSSEC alerts will not be sent via email.

This is a convenient environment to test how changes work across the full stack.

You should first bring up the VM required for building the app code
Debian packages on the staging machines:

.. code:: sh

   make build-debs
   make staging
   molecule login -s libvirt-staging-focal -h app-staging
   sudo -u www-data bash
   cd /var/www/securedrop
   ./manage.py add-admin

To rebuild the local packages for the app code and update the staging VMs:

.. code:: sh

   make build-debs
   make staging

The Debian packages will be rebuilt from the current state of your
local git repository and then installed on the staging servers.

.. note:: If you are using macOS and you run into errors from Ansible
          such as ``OSError: [Errno 24] Too many open files``, you may need to
          increase the maximum number of open files. Some guides online suggest
          a procedure to do this that involves booting to recovery mode
          and turning off System Integrity Protection (``csrutil disable``).
          However this is a critical security feature and should not be
          disabled. Instead follow this procedure to increase the file limit.

          Set ``/Library/LaunchDaemons/limit.maxfiles.plist`` to the following:

          .. code:: sh

              <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
              <!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN" "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd">
                <plist version="1.0">
                  <dict>
                    <key>Label</key>
                      <string>limit.maxfiles</string>
                    <key>ProgramArguments</key>
                      <array>
                        <string>launchctl</string>
                        <string>limit</string>
                        <string>maxfiles</string>
                        <string>65536</string>
                        <string>65536</string>
                      </array>
                    <key>RunAtLoad</key>
                      <true/>
                    <key>ServiceIPC</key>
                      <false/>
                  </dict>
                </plist>

          The plist file should be owned by ``root:wheel``:

          .. code:: sh

            sudo chown root:wheel /Library/LaunchDaemons/limit.maxfiles.plist

          This will increase the maximum open file limits system wide on macOS
          (last tested on 10.11.6).

The web interfaces and SSH are available over Tor. A copy of the the Onion URLs
for *Source* and *Journalist Interfaces*, as well as SSH access, are written to the
Vagrant host's ``install_files/ansible-base`` directory.

To access the *Source Interface* from Tor Browser, use the v3 onion URL from the file 
``install_files/ansible-base/app-sourcev3-ths``.

To use the *Journalist Interface*, you will need to modify Tor Browser's 
configuration to allow access to an authenticated onion service:

- First, add the following line to your Tor Browser's ``torrc`` file, typically
  found at ``tor-browser_en-US/Browser/TorBrowser/Data/Tor/torrc``:

  .. code-block:: none

    ClientOnionAuthDir TorBrowser/Data/Tor/onion_auth

- Next, create the ``onion_auth`` directory:

  .. code:: sh

    mkdir tor-browser_en-US/Browser/TorBrowser/Data/Tor/onion_auth
    chmod 0700 tor-browser_en-US/Browser/TorBrowser/Data/Tor/onion_auth

- Finally, copy the file ``install_files/ansible-base/app-journalist.auth_private``
  to the ``onion_auth`` directory and restart Tor Browser. You should now be able 
  to visit the v3 onion address in ``app-journalist.auth_private`` from Tor Browser.


For working on OSSEC monitoring rules with most system hardening active, update
the OSSEC-related configuration in
``install_files/ansible-base/staging.yml`` so you receive the OSSEC
alert emails.

Direct SSH access is available for staging hosts, so you can use
``molecule login -s <scenario> -h app-staging``, where ``<scenario>``
is either ``libvirt-staging-focal`` or ``qubes-staging-focal``, depending
on your environment.

By default, the staging environments are created with an empty submissions database. If you want to set up a staging environment with a preexisting submissions database, you can do so using a SecureDrop backup file as follows:

- Create a directory ``install_files/ansible-base/test-data``.
- Copy the backup file to the directory above.
- Define an environmental variable ``TEST_DATA_FILE`` whose value is the name  of the backup file - for example ``sd-backup.tar.gz`` - and run ``make staging``:
  
  .. code:: sh

    TEST_DATA_FILE="sd-backup.tar.gz" make staging

A staging environment will be created using the submissions and account data from the backup, but ignoring the backup file's Tor configuration data.

.. note:: It is not recommended to use backup data from a live SecureDrop installation in staging, as the backup may contain sensitive information and the staging environment should not be considered secure.


When finished with the Staging environment, run ``molecule destroy -s <scenario>``
to clean up the VMs. If the host machine has been rebooted since the Staging
environment was created, Molecule will fail to find the VM info, as it's stored
in ``/tmp``. If you use libvirt, run ``virt-manager`` and destroy the staging VMs
manually, by right-clicking on the entries and choosing **Destroy**.

.. _production_vms:

Production
----------

This is a production installation with all of the system hardening active, but
virtualized, rather than running on hardware. You will need to
:ref:`configure prod-like secrets<configure_securedrop>`, or export
``ANSIBLE_ARGS="--skip-tags validate"`` to skip the tasks that prevent the prod
playbook from running with Vagrant-specific info.

You can provision production VMs from an Admin Workstation (most realistic),
or from your host. If your host OS is Linux-based and you plan to use an Admin
Workstation, you will need to switch Vagrant's default virtualization provider
from ``virtualbox`` to  ``libvirt``.  The Admin Workstation VM configuration
under Linux uses QEMU/KVM, which cannot run simultaneously with Virtualbox.

Instructions for both installation methods follow.

.. _libvirt_provider:

Switching to the Vagrant libvirt provider
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Make sure you've already installed Vagrant, as described
in the :ref:`multi-machine setup docs <multi_machine_environment>`.

Ubuntu 20.04 setup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Install libvirt and QEMU:

.. code:: sh

   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install libvirt-bin libvirt-dev qemu-utils qemu virt-manager
   sudo /etc/init.d/libvirt-bin restart

Add your user to the libvirtd group:

.. code:: sh

   sudo addgroup libvirtd
   sudo usermod -a -g libvirtd $USER

Install the required Vagrant plugins for converting and using libvirt boxes:

.. code:: sh

   vagrant plugin install vagrant-libvirt
   vagrant plugin install vagrant-mutate

.. note:: If Vagrant is already installed it may not recognize libvirt as a
   valid provider. In this case, remove Vagrant with ``sudo apt-get remove
   vagrant`` and reinstall it.

Log out, then log in again. Verify that libvirt is installed and KVM is available:

.. code:: sh

   libvirtd --version
   kvm-ok


Debian stable setup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Install Vagrant, libvirt, QEMU, and their dependencies:

.. code:: sh

   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install -y vagrant vagrant-libvirt libvirt-daemon-system qemu-kvm virt-manager
   sudo apt-get install -y ansible rsync
   vagrant plugin install vagrant-libvirt
   vagrant plugin install vagrant-mutate
   sudo usermod -a -G libvirt $USER
   sudo systemctl restart libvirtd

Add your user to the kvm group to give it permission to run KVM:

.. code:: sh

   sudo usermod -a -G kvm $USER
   sudo rmmod kvm_intel
   sudo rmmod kvm
   sudo modprobe kvm
   sudo modprobe kvm_intel

Log out, then log in again. Verify that libvirt is installed and your system
supports KVM:

.. code:: sh

   sudo libvirtd --version
   [ `egrep -c 'flags\s*:.*(vmx|svm)' /proc/cpuinfo` -gt 0 ] &&  \
   echo "KVM supported!" || echo "KVM not supported..." 

Set libvirt as the default provider
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Set the default Vagrant provider to ``libvirt``:

.. code:: sh

   echo 'export VAGRANT_DEFAULT_PROVIDER=libvirt' >> ~/.bashrc
   export VAGRANT_DEFAULT_PROVIDER=libvirt


.. note:: To explicitly specify the ``libvirt``  provider below, use the command
   ``vagrant up --provider=libvirt /prod/``

Convert Vagrant boxes to libvirt
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Convert the VirtualBox images for Focal from ``virtualbox`` to ``libvirt`` format:

.. code:: sh

   vagrant box add --provider virtualbox bento/ubuntu-20.04
   vagrant mutate bento/ubuntu-20.04 libvirt

You can now use the libvirt-backed VM images to develop against
the SecureDrop multi-machine environment.

.. _prod_install_from_tails:

Install from an Admin Workstation VM
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In SecureDrop, admin tasks are performed from a Tails *Admin Workstation*.
You should configure a Tails VM in order to install the SecureDrop production VMs
by following the instructions in the :ref:`Virtualizing Tails <virtualizing_tails>`
guide.

Once you're prepared the *Admin Workstation*, you can start each VM:

.. code:: sh

  vagrant up --no-provision /prod/

At this point you should be able to SSH into both ``app-prod`` and ``mon-prod``.
From here you can follow the :ref:`server configuration instructions
<test_connectivity>` to test connectivity and prepare the servers. These
instructions will have you generate SSH keys and use ``ssh-copy-id`` to transfer
the key onto the servers.

.. note:: If you have trouble SSHing to the servers from Ansible, remember
          to remove any old ATHS files in ``install_files/ansible-base``.

Now from your Admin workstation:

.. code:: sh

  cd ~/Persistent/securedrop
  ./securedrop-admin setup
  ./securedrop-admin sdconfig
  ./securedrop-admin install

.. note:: The sudo password for the ``app-prod`` and ``mon-prod`` servers is by
          default ``vagrant``.

After install you can configure your Admin Workstation to SSH into each VM via:

.. code:: sh

  ./securedrop-admin tailsconfig

Install from Host OS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you are not virtualizing Tails, you can manually modify ``site-specific``,
and then provision the machines. You should set the following options in
``site-specific``:

.. code:: sh

  ssh_users: "vagrant"
  monitor_ip: "10.0.1.5"
  monitor_hostname: "mon-prod"
  app_hostname: "app-prod"
  app_ip: "10.0.1.4"

Note that you will also need to generate Submission and OSSEC PGP public keys,
and provide email credentials to send emails to. Refer to
:ref:`this document on configuring prod-like secrets<configure_securedrop>`
for more details on those steps.

To create the prod servers, run:

.. code:: sh

   vagrant up /prod/
   vagrant ssh app-prod
   sudo -u www-data bash
   cd /var/www/securedrop/
   ./manage.py add-admin

A copy of the Onion URLs for Source and Journalist Interfaces, as well as
SSH access, are written to the Vagrant host's ``install_files/ansible-base``
directory, named:

* ``app-sourcev3-ths``
* ``app-journalist.auth_private``
* ``app-ssh.auth_private``
* ``mon-ssh.auth_private``

SSH Access
~~~~~~~~~~

By default, direct SSH access is not enabled in the prod environment. You will need to log
in over Tor after initial provisioning or set ``enable_ssh_over_tor`` to "false"
during ``./securedrop-admin tailsconfig``.

Commit message:

make build-debs requires py-enchant

docs/development/virtual_environments.rst, after:

Virtual Environments: Servers
=============================

SecureDrop is a multi-server system, and  you may need the full server
stack available in order to develop and test some features. To make this easier,
the project includes a Vagrantfile that can be used to create two predefined
virtual environments:

* :ref:`Staging <staging_vms>`
* :ref:`Production <production_vms>`

This document explains the purpose of, and how to get started working with, each
one.

.. note:: If you plan to alter the configuration of any of these machines, make sure to
          review the :ref:`config_tests` documentation.

.. note:: If you see test failures due to ``Too many levels of symbolic links``
          and you are using VirtualBox, try restarting VirtualBox.

.. _staging_vms:

Staging
-------

A compromise between the development and production environments. This
configuration can be thought of as identical to the production environment, with
a few exceptions:

* The Debian packages are built from your local copy of the code, instead of
  installing the current stable release packages from https://apt.freedom.press.
* The staging environment is configured for direct SSH access so it's
  more ergonomic for developers to interact with the system during debugging.
* The Postfix service is disabled, so OSSEC alerts will not be sent via email.

This is a convenient environment to test how changes work across the full stack.

You should first bring up the VM required for building the app code
Debian packages on the staging machines:

.. code:: sh

   sudo apt-get install python-enchant
   make build-debs
   make staging
   molecule login -s libvirt-staging-focal -h app-staging
   sudo -u www-data bash
   cd /var/www/securedrop
   ./manage.py add-admin

To rebuild the local packages for the app code and update the staging VMs:

.. code:: sh

   make build-debs
   make staging

The Debian packages will be rebuilt from the current state of your
local git repository and then installed on the staging servers.

.. note:: If you are using macOS and you run into errors from Ansible
          such as ``OSError: [Errno 24] Too many open files``, you may need to
          increase the maximum number of open files. Some guides online suggest
          a procedure to do this that involves booting to recovery mode
          and turning off System Integrity Protection (``csrutil disable``).
          However this is a critical security feature and should not be
          disabled. Instead follow this procedure to increase the file limit.

          Set ``/Library/LaunchDaemons/limit.maxfiles.plist`` to the following:

          .. code:: sh

              <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
              <!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN" "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd">
                <plist version="1.0">
                  <dict>
                    <key>Label</key>
                      <string>limit.maxfiles</string>
                    <key>ProgramArguments</key>
                      <array>
                        <string>launchctl</string>
                        <string>limit</string>
                        <string>maxfiles</string>
                        <string>65536</string>
                        <string>65536</string>
                      </array>
                    <key>RunAtLoad</key>
                      <true/>
                    <key>ServiceIPC</key>
                      <false/>
                  </dict>
                </plist>

          The plist file should be owned by ``root:wheel``:

          .. code:: sh

            sudo chown root:wheel /Library/LaunchDaemons/limit.maxfiles.plist

          This will increase the maximum open file limits system wide on macOS
          (last tested on 10.11.6).

The web interfaces and SSH are available over Tor. A copy of the the Onion URLs
for *Source* and *Journalist Interfaces*, as well as SSH access, are written to the
Vagrant host's ``install_files/ansible-base`` directory.

To access the *Source Interface* from Tor Browser, use the v3 onion URL from the file
``install_files/ansible-base/app-sourcev3-ths``.

To use the *Journalist Interface*, you will need to modify Tor Browser's
configuration to allow access to an authenticated onion service:

- First, add the following line to your Tor Browser's ``torrc`` file, typically
  found at ``tor-browser_en-US/Browser/TorBrowser/Data/Tor/torrc``:

  .. code-block:: none

    ClientOnionAuthDir TorBrowser/Data/Tor/onion_auth

- Next, create the ``onion_auth`` directory:

  .. code:: sh

    mkdir tor-browser_en-US/Browser/TorBrowser/Data/Tor/onion_auth
    chmod 0700 tor-browser_en-US/Browser/TorBrowser/Data/Tor/onion_auth

- Finally, copy the file ``install_files/ansible-base/app-journalist.auth_private``
  to the ``onion_auth`` directory and restart Tor Browser. You should now be able
  to visit the v3 onion address in ``app-journalist.auth_private`` from Tor Browser.


For working on OSSEC monitoring rules with most system hardening active, update
the OSSEC-related configuration in
``install_files/ansible-base/staging.yml`` so you receive the OSSEC
alert emails.

Direct SSH access is available for staging hosts, so you can use
``molecule login -s <scenario> -h app-staging``, where ``<scenario>``
is either ``libvirt-staging-focal`` or ``qubes-staging-focal``, depending
on your environment.

By default, the staging environments are created with an empty submissions database. If you want to set up a staging environment with a preexisting submissions database, you can do so using a SecureDrop backup file as follows:

- Create a directory ``install_files/ansible-base/test-data``.
- Copy the backup file to the directory above.
- Define an environmental variable ``TEST_DATA_FILE`` whose value is the name  of the backup file - for example ``sd-backup.tar.gz`` - and run ``make staging``:

  .. code:: sh

    TEST_DATA_FILE="sd-backup.tar.gz" make staging

A staging environment will be created using the submissions and account data from the backup, but ignoring the backup file's Tor configuration data.

.. note:: It is not recommended to use backup data from a live SecureDrop installation in staging, as the backup may contain sensitive information and the staging environment should not be considered secure.


When finished with the Staging environment, run ``molecule destroy -s <scenario>``
to clean up the VMs. If the host machine has been rebooted since the Staging
environment was created, Molecule will fail to find the VM info, as it's stored
in ``/tmp``. If you use libvirt, run ``virt-manager`` and destroy the staging VMs
manually, by right-clicking on the entries and choosing **Destroy**.

.. _production_vms:

Production
----------

This is a production installation with all of the system hardening active, but
virtualized, rather than running on hardware. You will need to
:ref:`configure prod-like secrets<configure_securedrop>`, or export
``ANSIBLE_ARGS="--skip-tags validate"`` to skip the tasks that prevent the prod
playbook from running with Vagrant-specific info.

You can provision production VMs from an Admin Workstation (most realistic),
or from your host. If your host OS is Linux-based and you plan to use an Admin
Workstation, you will need to switch Vagrant's default virtualization provider
from ``virtualbox`` to  ``libvirt``.  The Admin Workstation VM configuration
under Linux uses QEMU/KVM, which cannot run simultaneously with Virtualbox.

Instructions for both installation methods follow.

.. _libvirt_provider:

Switching to the Vagrant libvirt provider
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Make sure you've already installed Vagrant, as described
in the :ref:`multi-machine setup docs <multi_machine_environment>`.

Ubuntu 20.04 setup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Install libvirt and QEMU:

.. code:: sh

   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install libvirt-bin libvirt-dev qemu-utils qemu virt-manager
   sudo /etc/init.d/libvirt-bin restart

Add your user to the libvirtd group:

.. code:: sh

   sudo addgroup libvirtd
   sudo usermod -a -g libvirtd $USER

Install the required Vagrant plugins for converting and using libvirt boxes:

.. code:: sh

   vagrant plugin install vagrant-libvirt
   vagrant plugin install vagrant-mutate

.. note:: If Vagrant is already installed it may not recognize libvirt as a
   valid provider. In this case, remove Vagrant with ``sudo apt-get remove
   vagrant`` and reinstall it.

Log out, then log in again. Verify that libvirt is installed and KVM is available:

.. code:: sh

   libvirtd --version
   kvm-ok


Debian stable setup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Install Vagrant, libvirt, QEMU, and their dependencies:

.. code:: sh

   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install -y vagrant vagrant-libvirt libvirt-daemon-system qemu-kvm virt-manager
   sudo apt-get install -y ansible rsync
   vagrant plugin install vagrant-libvirt
   vagrant plugin install vagrant-mutate
   sudo usermod -a -G libvirt $USER
   sudo systemctl restart libvirtd

Add your user to the kvm group to give it permission to run KVM:

.. code:: sh

   sudo usermod -a -G kvm $USER
   sudo rmmod kvm_intel
   sudo rmmod kvm
   sudo modprobe kvm
   sudo modprobe kvm_intel

Log out, then log in again. Verify that libvirt is installed and your system
supports KVM:

.. code:: sh

   sudo libvirtd --version
   [ `egrep -c 'flags\s*:.*(vmx|svm)' /proc/cpuinfo` -gt 0 ] &&  \
   echo "KVM supported!" || echo "KVM not supported..."

Set libvirt as the default provider
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Set the default Vagrant provider to ``libvirt``:

.. code:: sh

   echo 'export VAGRANT_DEFAULT_PROVIDER=libvirt' >> ~/.bashrc
   export VAGRANT_DEFAULT_PROVIDER=libvirt


.. note:: To explicitly specify the ``libvirt``  provider below, use the command
   ``vagrant up --provider=libvirt /prod/``

Convert Vagrant boxes to libvirt
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Convert the VirtualBox images for Focal from ``virtualbox`` to ``libvirt`` format:

.. code:: sh

   vagrant box add --provider virtualbox bento/ubuntu-20.04
   vagrant mutate bento/ubuntu-20.04 libvirt

You can now use the libvirt-backed VM images to develop against
the SecureDrop multi-machine environment.

.. _prod_install_from_tails:

Install from an Admin Workstation VM
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In SecureDrop, admin tasks are performed from a Tails *Admin Workstation*.
You should configure a Tails VM in order to install the SecureDrop production VMs
by following the instructions in the :ref:`Virtualizing Tails <virtualizing_tails>`
guide.

Once you're prepared the *Admin Workstation*, you can start each VM:

.. code:: sh

  vagrant up --no-provision /prod/

At this point you should be able to SSH into both ``app-prod`` and ``mon-prod``.
From here you can follow the :ref:`server configuration instructions
<test_connectivity>` to test connectivity and prepare the servers. These
instructions will have you generate SSH keys and use ``ssh-copy-id`` to transfer
the key onto the servers.

.. note:: If you have trouble SSHing to the servers from Ansible, remember
          to remove any old ATHS files in ``install_files/ansible-base``.

Now from your Admin workstation:

.. code:: sh

  cd ~/Persistent/securedrop
  ./securedrop-admin setup
  ./securedrop-admin sdconfig
  ./securedrop-admin install

.. note:: The sudo password for the ``app-prod`` and ``mon-prod`` servers is by
          default ``vagrant``.

After install you can configure your Admin Workstation to SSH into each VM via:

.. code:: sh

  ./securedrop-admin tailsconfig

Install from Host OS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you are not virtualizing Tails, you can manually modify ``site-specific``,
and then provision the machines. You should set the following options in
``site-specific``:

.. code:: sh

  ssh_users: "vagrant"
  monitor_ip: "10.0.1.5"
  monitor_hostname: "mon-prod"
  app_hostname: "app-prod"
  app_ip: "10.0.1.4"

Note that you will also need to generate Submission and OSSEC PGP public keys,
and provide email credentials to send emails to. Refer to
:ref:`this document on configuring prod-like secrets<configure_securedrop>`
for more details on those steps.

To create the prod servers, run:

.. code:: sh

   vagrant up /prod/
   vagrant ssh app-prod
   sudo -u www-data bash
   cd /var/www/securedrop/
   ./manage.py add-admin

A copy of the Onion URLs for Source and Journalist Interfaces, as well as
SSH access, are written to the Vagrant host's ``install_files/ansible-base``
directory, named:

* ``app-sourcev3-ths``
* ``app-journalist.auth_private``
* ``app-ssh.auth_private``
* ``mon-ssh.auth_private``

SSH Access
~~~~~~~~~~

By default, direct SSH access is not enabled in the prod environment. You will need to log
in over Tor after initial provisioning or set ``enable_ssh_over_tor`` to "false"
during ``./securedrop-admin tailsconfig``.
